# Oil Availability and Price Prediction Model

The oil price has a major impact on the world economics and at the same time, oil consumption rejects CO2 that increases climate change and its impact (including economical impact).

Because oil has limited reserves on earth, this model tries to represent the impact of countries reserves evolution on oil reference price.

Because crude oil is at the foundation of all oil dervatives, its price and availability has been chosen to represent the global oil market.

## Model Principle

This model is divided in 3 parts repreented as Classes in the model:
- dataset: to retrieve, clean and add features to the reference historical data that will be used to create predictions for crude oil availability and price
- reserves model: to predict how crude oil reserves in the different countries and consolidated at world level could evolve
- price model: based on an historical correlation between production drop and price increase, will fit a baseline price trend and add a correction to the price everytime th prodduction of a country is short because the country reserves are coming to an end.

## Historical data reference

The chosen reference data are the BP Statistical review 2020.

https://www.bp.com/en/global/corporate/energy-economics/statistical-review-of-world-energy/oil.html#oil-reserves

It has been chosen because it is the most comprehensive providing reservesdata for various countries.

The price information are also coming from the same source.

## Model Outputs

The model outputs series for reserves predictions and price predictions along with the intermediate results.

It also provides some methods in the reserves and price model to plot th results (crude oil reserves by country or at world level, shortage of reserves of each country along the world reserves evolution, price baseline model, function to estimate price change based on produciton evolution and oil price prediction).

## Model Hypothesis and Limitations

- Crude oil reserves data
  - provided data are sometimes poorly estimated due to the difficulty to aggregate this information and to the lack of willingness of many countries to share accurate data for strategical reasons.
  - until almost years 2000, most countries were in an exploration dynamic so that the reserves data are reflecting especillay an increasing trend while new wells are discovered. It induces that the actual consistent trend could only be fitted on a restricted amount of years that might uder reflect the speed at which world reserves are decreasing. In the model reserves, the reserves historical data for regression are expressly truncated starting in 2000 for all countries except South Sudan where data would be too poor.

- Basing price evolution on end of reserves: Energy Return on Energy Invested might be a better assumption because before reserves are completly used,it is likely that based on the type of crude oil, the difficulty to recover it will make the energy cost to extract it higher than what could be generated by burning it. The effect is that likely for all countries based on their oil type mix, the year on which the major shortage will occur and peak production will be earlier.
- Price correction function is only based on a single historical correlation that is not proven as a causality. It leads to difficulty and likely unreliable prices increase when the production change expected due to major supplier shortage. Indeed predicted prices are predicted to rise past 1000$ which is unlikely to be sustainable by the economy and other reaction would occur simultaneously. A sensitivity analysis with other models in the trade is planned to assess the impact of this inconsistency. A first correction would be to fix a max price for oil.
- Baseline price is a basic linear regression to generalize the trend of increasing oil price. If such a trend would be easy to interpolate, it is likely that the market price would rise quicker, seller refusing to release their barrels under the price that is likely to be reached by the term of their purchasing contract. An evolution would be to use the transportation and extraction price evolution based on oil price and oil demand repartition to have a base at the minimum price to compensate production cost and then predict the variation based on demand (though negative price have been seen reflecting other mechanism than a pure cost + margin determination of oil price).
- Prediciton are made assuming that historical data already contain the context and situation that explains the oil price today and in the future. This assumption is relatively weak knowing that event like Covid Pandemic and Climate Change are unprecedented in history of oil market (the latter even in all history). Additionnaly, some other major factor like the production quota decided by major oil producer consortiums are not only related to actual data but to complex geopolitical situations that takes into account unquantified and poorly documented information (diplomatical tension, political pression on other subject, disputed area, illegal traffic, embargo).


__Observation__: According to some interpretations, it could be also possible that the overall trend of oil price is unpredictable and rather its volatility and even the volatility of the volatility could be anticipated but based on many combined features that are not necessarily yet identified.
Knowing whether the oil price will finish at extremely high prices when all countries will be unable to supply the world demand, if the demand would go down due to decarbonation and prices will fall, remains hypothetical. An evolution would be to try to consider anticipating any event that will affect oil price, yet not being able to anticipate necessarily in which direction the oil price would go.

